This is the app we worked on thus far,
this shop app and attached you find this snapshot which includes authentication
in case you didn't follow the previous modules or you don't want to follow them, just be aware that for
this to work, you of course need a Firebase back-end and in your files, you need to adjust my Firebase
URLs with your Firebase URLs in your Firebase API keys for example,
so you'll have to make these adjustments in all these provider files here, make sure to set up your Firebase
project and use your URLs if you're taking my attached snapshot. And with that, what could we
animate here?
Well I'd say we started to right here on the auth screen. When I switch to sign up mode and back to
login,
we have this jump here right,
we simply increase the box height and then we shrink it again
and whilst this of course does work and certainly it's obvious to the user what's changed,
we might still want to improve that a little bit, for example by gradually animating this container and
sliding and fading the confirm password field in for example
and that's of course just one idea of how you could animate this but it's exactly what I want to build
together with you here to give you an idea for how this could work.
For that, let's go to the screens and there to the auth screen of course because that is the screen where
I want to add animations and in there, we have a stateful widget.
We have our auth screen which is a stateless widget but then we have the auth card and that's a stateful
widget and that's this white box in the middle here which is the thing I want to animate.
Now it's good that this is a stateful widget because for full control or for this approach of controlling
an animation from scratch, you need a stateful widget because the way animations work in Flutter is
basically that Flutter updates the screen 60 times per second, so every 16 milliseconds basically and
animations work such that we continuously change something in our state, change some value and change
that with every frame update, so every 16 milliseconds, so that we can then change something in the screen
every 60 milliseconds,
for example the height of the container and because we change it so often, to the human eye it looks
like a smooth animation, a smooth transition even though we technically just changed the height of the
container here as I just said every 60 milliseconds.
Now of course, a basic way of building an animation therefore would be in our state object here, in our state
class to have some property which could be our container height let's say, which initially is
a base height,
let's have a look at the height
I set up down there, 260, so that could be our base height which we set up here and now we need some
timer,
basically an interval which fires every 60 milliseconds and then we add something to that height so
that we reach 320 which is our end height by the end of 60 times 60 milliseconds,
so by the end of one second. And we could do that,
we could manage this manually, like this but of course Flutter thankfully has better tools for helping
us with that.
So when you build a fully controlled, so controlled by you, animation with Flutter, you typically start
by setting up an animation controller and I'll store it here in a controller, _controller variable
and please note this is a variable, I just use the type instead of the var keyword because I'm not initializing
this with a value and hence the type would otherwise be unknown to Dart and animation controller of course
is a class provided by Flutter that helps us with controlling animations as the name suggests.
Now the controller is one thing, we also need to set up an animation object and since I plan on animating
the hight or in other words, the size of a container, animation is a generic type where we have to tell
Dart or Flutter what we want to animate,
so here I want to animate the size and size is another class just like animation provided by Flutter,
so by material.dart file which I'm importing at the top and I'll name this height animation, the name
of course is totally up to you.
So now we got a controller which we can later use to start or revert the animation and then we got the
animation itself which will in the end do all the heavy lifting of changing a value over time.
Now both should be configured when this state object is created,
so I'll add initState here and in initState, I want to set up my controller and I want to setup the
height animation. So let's first of all assign a value to the controller
and here we instantiate a new animation controller, using that animation controller class and the animation
controller now should get at least two values here.
The first one is the vsync value, now vsync
in a nutshell basically is an argument where we give the animation controller a pointer at the
object, the widget in the end which it should watch
and only when that widget is really visible on the screen, the animation should play,
so this optimizes performance because it ensures that we really only animate what's visible to the user.
So I want to point at these widgets or at this state object which belongs to a widget of course which has
a build method
and for this to work, I just need to add a mixin here, so we add the width keyword after extending the
state and what I import here is the SingleTickerProviderStateMixin. Complicated name,
in the end provided by material.dart from the Flutter package and what this does in the end is it simply
adds a couple of methods and properties here
and what this does if we have a look at it, it simply adds a method here, a couple of methods actually
to this class here, to this state class which is then implicitly used by vsync or by the animation
controller to find out whether it's currently visible and so on.
So we add this, the other thing I add here or the other thing I want to configure on the controller is
the duration of the animation and you could also specify a separate reverse duration in case you want
to have different durations for playing the animation forward and backward. If you don't specify different
durations, the duration here will be used for both directions.
Now here, you simply create a duration object with the duration class and you can set this to whatever
you want,
I'll set it to 300 milliseconds, which is a typical duration for animations. You don't want to
make this too long of course,
users shouldn't wait for that to finish,
it just should be just long enough to show the user what happened without blocking user input.
So that's the controller,
now for the animation itself, for the height animation. The height animation here is set up with another
class provided by Flutter, the tween class. The tween class
when you instantiate it gives you an object which in the end knows how to animate between two values,
so tween because of between. Tween is a generic class because there are different things you can animate
between,
for example, you could offset a container or anything like that to have it slide in, here
I want to animate the size and now tween, the constructor here, has two arguments which you should provide,
the begin and the end named argument. For begin, you define a size and size here has two arguments,
width and height.
I don't want to animate the width, so I'll set this to double infinity for beginning and for ending but
for the height here, I want to start at 260
and then for end, I want to set up a size where I also don't change the width, so the width still is double
infinity
but then we have 320 as the ending height and these are the heights I'm assigning to my container
down there.
Here when we're in sign up mode, I set this to 320,
otherwise it has a height of 260,
so that is just what I control up there. Now
tween itself doesn't give us an animation though, it just has information on how to animate between two
values, to create an animated object based on this,
you have to call animate and now pass in an animation object which will basically wrap itself around
this information on what to animate and the animation object describes how to animate it.
Here you typically use a curved animation by simply creating it here with the curved animation constructor
and curved animation now also needs to be configured.
You need to inform this curved animation what its parent is and that simply is the controller by which
it should be controlled,
so you point at _controller and then we have the duration, we have the
what, so what's to animate, the missing thing is to curve here for curved animation, that simply defines
how the duration time here is basically split.
The default here of course would be Curves.linear, curves
simply is a helper class with a couple of static properties and linear means that it simply moves between
the begin and end value here in the same speed
but you can also for example set this to easeIn or fastOutSlowIn
which means it starts slow and ends fast and typically, you want to experiment with these different values
to find an animation between these start and end values
that looks good.
So now with that, we got the animation setup in the controller,
now we just need to connect that to our widget down there.
We do connect this here to this container by no longer having our if condition here, so I'll copy that so
that we still can see the old mode here or the old code, instead
here, we assign this to heightAnimation.value and there, .height of course and this will change
over time as soon as we start the animation.
The same here for the box constrains where I set a minimum height,
we also change this to our height here,
so that the minimum height changes dynamically and the difference to
the old code is that we don't suddenly change from 260 to 320,
instead we smoothly animate there
but of course we now need to kick off this animation and we do that in switchAuthMode. Instead of just
switching the auth mode here,
we want to make sure that when we do go to the sign up mode, we increase the height and therefore we
should use our controller here and call forward, forward starts
the animation. Now and once you're done, you want out play that back,
so here you simply call controller
reverse, so when you're going back to login mode, you want to reverse the animation to shrink the container
again.
Now with that added, we're almost there,
there's still one more thing missing,
we also have to go to the place where we define the height animation, so in the initState and
there, we also now need to add a listener to call set state
whenever this updates and it should update whenever it redraws the screen.
So here in the end, we just have an anonymous function in which we call set state and to set state, we
can pass an empty update function because there isn't really something I want to update,
I just want to rerun the build method to redraw the screen
and with that, that here should be milliseconds otherwise we'll not really see an animation, that
would be far too short,
so milliseconds, not microseconds
and with that if I now do a full refresh, you'll see this is now getting animated, you see the container
now is animated.
Now of course, it's pretty cumbersome if we always have to add our own listener here
and by the way we should not just set up a listener here,
we should also dispose of it when the widget is removed,
when the state is removed.
So we should add dispose here and inside of dispose, we should also call controller dispose
to make sure that we clean the listener and so on.
Now with that, we could control the height here and we would animate it
but of course is pretty cumbersome to manually set up a listener, assign a height down there and
so on and thankfully, Flutter has built-in widgets that make it easier for us.
It is important however to understand what happens behind the scenes and that you have a controller
and an animation play together, controller simply controls, starts, configures and so on the animation, animation
then decides how to animate between which values and then you use the animation simply wherever you
want to use that dynamically changed value which changes very often per second
somewhere in your widget tree.
Now of course keep in mind the build reruns for every frame therefore, so every 16 milliseconds, build
reruns and things did change on the UI.
So you want to make sure that you really only rebuild the things that do need updating and you want
to make sure that you update as efficiently as possible.
So let's have a look at that and therefore at the first built-in widget which helps us with animations
before we then progress further into building widgets and how we can animate other things as well.